bbc
Spain seeks compensation for E. coli blame

Click to play

Spanish producers dumped vegetables at the German consulate
Continue reading the main story
Europe's E. coli outbreak

    Your reaction
    European Press review
    In pictures: Produce pulped
    Q&A: E. coli outbreak

Spain says it will seek damages over claims its produce was the source of an E. coli outbreak that has killed 18 people and left hundreds seriously ill.

Spanish PM Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero said he would demand reparations for the economic losses suffered.

Germany - where the outbreak is centred - had blamed Spanish cucumbers but has since accepted it was not the case.

Scientists, still searching for the source, say the outbreak features a new form of the E. coli bacterium.

The strain has been described as highly toxic.
'Horrendous'
Continue reading the main story
At the scene
Sarah Rainsford BBC News, Almeria

Down a long road flanked with giant hot-houses, Juan Lopez is one of many 
<a href="cnn.txt"> Spanish </a> farmers struggling to stay afloat.

He still has staff picking the ripest produce from the rows of plants under plastic, but not for market. Crates of cucumbers are weighed and recorded before being pulped: future proof of what has been lost, in case there's compensation.

Juan's hope is that confidence in Spanish produce will recover by the time the smaller fruit is ripe for picking. But with perishable goods, time is critical and Juan can't afford to wait indefinitely.

    Spanish farmers blame Germany for crisis
    In pictures: Europe's produce pulped

Spanish fruit and vegetable exporters estimate they are losing 200m euros ($290m; £177m) a week in sales after Germany's initial claim that the outbreak had probably originated with Spanish cucumbers.

No evidence of this has been found and <a href="aol.txt"> researchers </a> are scrambling to find the source.

"We acted as we had to, and we are going to get reparations and the return of Spanish products to their rightful place," said Spanish Prime Minister Zapatero.

"I believe that any other interpretation or any effort to politicise the huge mistake made by the German authorities is totally unfair."

Sales of Spanish produce to <a href="nydailynews.txt"> supermarkets </a>  across Europe - not just of cucumbers, but of everything - have ground to a halt, says the BBC's Sarah Rainsford in Almeria, Spain's "fruitbasket".

Tens of thousands of kilos of fresh fruit and vegetables grown in Spain are being destroyed, she adds.
Continue reading the main story
Health advice

    Wash fruit and vegetables before eating them
    Peel or cook fruit and vegetables
    Wash hands regularly to prevent person-to-person spread of E. coli strain

Source: UK Health Protection Agency

    Q&A: E. coli outbreak

"We're filling container upon container with produce to throw away," Noelia Perez, deputy financial director of Costa de Almeria, the firm initially blamed for the outbreak, said. "It's horrendous."

The European Union has urged Russia - its largest export market for vegetables - to drop its ban on the import of fresh vegetables, describing the move as totally disproportionate.

The outbreak remains centred on Germany, where there have been 1,064 cases of bloody diarrhoea and 470 cases of haemolytic-uraemic syndrome (HUS), which affects the kidneys and can be fatal.

    E. coli map: How the outbreak has spread

Seventeen people in Germany and one in Sweden have died. Cases of HUS have also been reported in Denmark, the Netherlands and Spain. Seven people in the UK have the infection, though all are thought to have contracted it in Germany.

Two people in the US, who have travelled recently to Germany, are being tested for the strain, the US Centers for Disease Control and Preventation (CDC) said.

Scientists at the Beijing Genomics Institute in China - where they are researching the strain - said the outbreak appeared to be due to a new form of the E. coli bacterium that was "highly infectious and toxic".

The World Health Organization said the variant had "never been seen in an outbreak situation before".

Speaking to Reuters news agency, Dr Robert Tauxe of the CDC said the strain was probably the most deadly yet.

Have you or your family been affected by the E. coli outbreak? Are you happy to talk to the BBC about your experiences? If so please send us your details using the form below.
in called Bmi1 was already known to play a key role in the survival and proliferation of various cancer stem cells.
Continue reading the main story
“Start Quote

    This research is important in uncovering how leukaemia stem cells are controlled at the genetic level which, in turn, will guide new treatments to tackle this difficult problem”

Dr David Grant Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research

But the King's team showed that targeting Bmi1 alone was not enough to eradicate the rogue stem cells, as had previously been thought.

To do that, the scientists found that Bmi1 had to be targeted in harness with a second protein, Hoxa9.

This double assault abolished the ability of MLL mutation to induce leukaemia.

Researcher Professor Eric So said: "These findings take us a step forward in our understanding of how this devastating disease can return in patients after they have received the standard treatment.

"Now we know that leukaemic stem cells in certain types of leukaemia, such as MLL, can survive and proliferate independently of the Bmi1 protein, we need to consider more carefully the future of stem cell therapy to treat the disease.

"It's not as easy as people originally thought it might be."

Professor So said the next step would be to pin down exactly how the two proteins help cancer cells to grow.

Professor Peter Johnson, Cancer Research UK's chief clinician, said: "Cancer stem cells appear to be more resistant to radiotherapy and chemotherapy than the other leukaemia cells, so understanding how they originate - and how we can kill them - will be a major step in being able to help even more people survive leukaemia in future."

Dr David Grant, scientific director of Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research, said: "It is now widely agreed that leukaemia stem cells are the true target for new or existing drugs if patients are to be cured.

"This research is important in uncovering how leukaemia stem cells are controlled at the genetic level which in turn will guide new treatments to tackle this difficult problem." 