guardian

Much ado about cucumbers

Cucumbers are unlikely to be responsible for the E coli outbreak in Germany. There's no reason to stop enjoying salads

        
        Derek Hargreaves
        guardian.co.uk, Wednesday 1 June 2011 17.01 BST
        Article history

Cucumber grower
Orders for cucumbers from Spain and Holland have been cancelled since the E coli outbreak in Germany. Photograph

The food scare, tragic deaths and serious illness that have struck Germany indicate how delicately nature is balanced, and how easily this equilibrium can be disrupted. First indications pointed to Spanish cucumbers as the probable source of the E coli outbreak, and the resulting uncertainty about fresh produce has had dramatic effects across Europe and beyond. But it would now appear that cucumbers are not the cause, and the actual point of infection has yet to be identified.

The Cucumber Growers' Association has always argued that this incident was more likely to have been caused by contamination of the salad ingredients close to the point of consumption, rather than any contamination of the fruit when it was growing. How can we be so sure? One can't be absolutely certain about <a href="cnn.txt"> anything </a>, but having worked with cucumbers for the past 32 years I can say that this has never occurred in all that <a href="yahoo.txt"> time </a>. E coli is a bacterium best equipped to survive and multiply at temperatures above 35C inside the gut. It is possible to put E coli on to the surface of a cucumber – but even that is quite difficult. The obvious possibilities could include someone going to the toilet without washing their hands afterwards, or someone handling animals and then preparing food without washing their hands. Those risks can be minimised by being vigilant. <a href="bbc.txt"> Hand-washing </a> before growers enter the crop, coupled with the use of hospital-style alcohol gel hand sanitisers, are these days used to help protect the consumer. These precautions are used in the growing houses and also in the grading and packing areas, so that the produce that is sent out is clean and wholesome.

If you look at this outbreak sensibly – and if the cause of the problem was a nursery or nurseries in Spain with E coli present on their cucumbers – the infected fruit would have gone to multiple outlets across Europe, and we would be seeing lots of centres of disease outbreak, not just a single one. The standards of hygiene that are followed by UK and European growers are set down by audit standards that are universal across Europe – it is impossible to supply major outlets these days without complying with these standards.

One of the problems with growing crops is that they grow. You can't switch them off like you could a baked bean factory: they just keep coming. There has already been a considerable drop in demand in Germany, where authorities are advising consumers not to eat salads because they still have not pinpointed the cause of the outbreak. This is affecting the area around Hamburg in particular; the rest of Europe appears to be OK. But the knock-on effect is that orders for cucumbers from Spain and Holland have been cancelled altogether, or at best reduced. For cucumbers from Holland, the obvious place to look is in the UK – we already take large volumes of cucumbers at this time of the year. Extra cucumbers will be "dumped" here rather than marketed, and this will drop the price paid to the grower. These price reductions, if they occur, are unlikely to affect the price in the shops but they do have a massive effect on the price paid to growers in the UK.

Growers are concerned that consumers will think best not to buy cucumbers until it has all blown over. But there is nothing wrong with UK cucumbers – and that is emphasised by the Health Protection Agency and the Food Standards Agency. We would ask UK consumers who may be concerned to look for the "produce of" label and see where it is from – if it is produced here, then there is nothing to worry about. These days you also often have the name of the person who has grown the crop on the label. The produce can therefore be traced back to the individual grower and the actual greenhouse where it was grown. All we want is for consumers to buy the produce and enjoy healthy salads during this present run of good weather.
