haaretz

Israel may resume cucumber exports to Europe
By Amiram Cohen

Agrexco is contemplating renewing cucumber exports to Western Europe after 14 deaths from consuming "killer cucumbers" and other raw vegetables bearing deadly bacteria. The Israeli agricultural produce exporter had in the past exported cucumbers to Germany, Greece and other European destinations, but stopped because of competition from Spanish and Moroccan farmers.

The German and Dutch governments have directed people to shun salad vegetables after more than 300 people, mostly in Germany, contracted a potentially fatal intestinal infection that has already claimed 14 lives. The disease, hemolytic uremic syndrome, is caused by a violent strain of Escherichia coli. Most E. coli strains are harmless and commonly reside uneventfully in the human body. This strain is characterized by emission of a toxin that can cause hemorrhagic diarrhea and even kidney failure.
Fisheries Clara Aguilera 	

Andalusian regional minister of Agriculture and Fisheries Clara Aguilera.
Photo by: Reuters

Cases have been reported in Sweden, Denmark, the UK and Holland.

The German and Dutch governments have also directed their populations to avoid eating any raw cucumbers, tomatoes, peppers and lettuces, whether imported or locally cultivated. People have heeded the advice, causing heavy damage to farmers and marketing chains in both countries. The Dutch government is reportedly convening today for a special discussion on the issue.

The source of the virulent strain of the bacteria is unknown, German authorities said yesterday.
Spain denies all

What is the source? Final proof remains wanting. Tests conducted in European Union labs found that cucumbers imported from two vegetable plantations in southern Spain were infected by a violent strain of Escherichia coli bacteria. One of the farms is in Malaga and the other in Almeria. The same dangerous strain of bacteria has reportedly been also found in tomatoes and lettuce arriving from Spain. But the produce could have been contaminated in Spain, during transport or in Germany.

Germany imports 140,000 tons of cucumbers from Spain a year, about 40% of its consumption. Spain however says it has found no cause so far for the problems in Germany and that no cases have been reported in Spain itself. No disease-causing agents were found in its produce, Spain stated. Clara Aguilera, Andalusian regional minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, demonstrated the point by eating a cucumber and said she couldn't understand why "everyone" is against Spain.

Vegetable imports from Europe are marginal, and have recently included small quantities of Belgian endives and onions from Holland, but the Agriculture Ministry reports that Israel doesn't import cucumbers from Spain. All produce imports arriving in Israel by sea or by air are examined by Health Ministry laboratories for the presence of pathogenic elements such as bacterial parasites and viruses, as well as plant diseases that could harm local vegetable crops. Israel does import various fruits from Spain, particularly apples, but every shipment of fruit is also inspected by the Health Ministry and by Agricultural Ministry plant protection labs.

Knowledgeable sources at the Agriculture Ministry believe the tainted cucumbers may have been irrigated using treated wastewater, although this practice is prohibited in European countries.


In Israel, most vegetables are irrigated using fresh water (drinking water ), brackish water (saline well water ) or <a href="yahoo.txt"> floodwaters </a>. In the south and Negev most irrigation is <a href="aol.txt"> by </a> tertiary-treated wastewater purified to the level of drinking water supplied by the Dan Region Wastewater Treatment Plant.

How are orchards <a href="yahoo.txt"> irrigated </a>?

Most of Israel's orchards are irrigated by treated wastewater, using the drip method (through hose pipes laid on the ground ) so the water doesn't come into contact with the vegetable. 