nydailynews
E. coli, 'killer cucumber' outbreak kills 16, infects more than 1,150 in Europe

BY Aliyah Shahid
DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

Originally Published:Tuesday, May 31st 2011, 3:08 PM
Updated: Wednesday, June 1st 2011, 11:14 AM
A biologist dissects a cucumber on Monday in northeastern Germany following an E. coli outbreak, believed to have originated from the vegetable.
Bernd Wuestneck/Getty
A biologist dissects a cucumber on Monday in northeastern Germany following an E. coli outbreak, believed to have originated from the vegetable.
16 dead in Europe


Beware the "killer cucumber."

An E. coli outbreak, believed to have originated from a crop of cucumbers grown in Spain, has killed at least 16 people across Europe.

The number sickened has reached more than 1,150 people in at least eight countries, including Sweden, Britain, Denmark, Spain, Germany and France.

Most of the deaths have been in northern Germany.

The Spanish-grown cucumbers tested positive for the E. coli pathogen, but it's not clear if they were contaminated in Spain, or possibly in Germany.

"Cucumbers, lettuce and tomatoes are being rejected, no matter where they come from," said Andreas Br?gger, who heads a major German fruit and vegetable grocery group . "Large supermarket chains, canteens, hospitals, gastronomy firms are all turning vegetables away. People are scared."

The outbreak, which started in mid-May, has strained diplomatic tension between the <a href="nytimes.txt"> nations </a>.

Russia has banned vegetable imports from both Germany and Spain, and authorities said they may extend it to all European Union member states.

Germany, Denmark, Czech Republic, Luxembourg, Hungary, Sweden, Belgium and Russia have prohibited Spanish cucumbers from entering their countries, Spanish media reported.

E. coli is a potentially deadly germ that can cause bloody diarrhea, dehydration and, in severe cases, kidney failure.

"The situation is tense but it can be dealt with," said German Health Minister Daniel Bahr at a news conference, who added the number of sick is expected to increase.

Spanish farmers are suffering an estimated $286 million per week in lost sales because of the outbreak, a farmers association said Tuesday, arguing they are being unfairly blamed for the food-borne illness.

"Our cucumbers are not responsible for the situation," said Rosa Aguilar, Spain's agriculture minister.

