nytimes

Two drugs using the latest scientific approaches can prolong the lives of people with advanced melanoma, marking what researchers say is notable progress against the deadly skin cancer after decades of futility.
Related

    Drug Can Reduce Risk of Breast Cancer, Study Says (June 5, 2011)
    Series: Target Cancer »

“Never before have we seen such advances,” said Dr. Sanjiv S. Agarwala, a melanoma specialist at Temple University and St. Luke’s Cancer Center in Bethlehem, Pa. “For patients, this is a huge leap forward.”

Experts say that right now <a href="yahoo.txt"> people </a> with melanoma that has spread beyond the skin are expected to live about six to ten months. But with the new drugs, that could rise by anywhere from two to several months. Some patients will do much better than that, though many other patients would not be helped at all by the new drugs.

The results of clinical trials involving the two drugs were presented here Sunday at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology and also published on line by the New England Journal of Medicine.

In one trial, 84 percent of <a href="guardian.txt"> patients </a> taking the experimental drug vemurafenib were still alive after six months, compared with only 64 percent of those getting an older chemotherapy drug dacarbazine. Using another statistical measure, the risk of dying was reduced 63 percent.

The effect was so dramatic that the trial was stopped early for ethical reasons, so that patients in the control group could be offered vemurafenib instead. Because of that, researchers do not yet know the median survival.  

“You don’t need to wait for 50 percent of 675 patients to die to conclude that one drug is much better than the <a href="bbc.txt"> other </a> ,” said Dr. Antoni Ribas of the University of California, Los Angeles, who was an investigator in the trial. Dr. Ribas, like Dr. Agarwala, has been a consultant to the developers of the melanoma drugs.

The other new drug, ipilimumab, when <a href="cnn.txt"> combined </a> with dacarbazine, extended median survival to 11.2 months compared with 9.1 months for those who received dacarbazine alone. After three years, 20.8 percent of those who got ipilimumab were alive compared with only 12.2 percent of those in the control group.

To be sure, the drugs, with possible rare exceptions, do not cure people. And more than half of patients with melanoma would not be helped much or at all by either drug. Experts say more needs to be done, especially since melanoma affects more young adults than many other types of cancer.

Even if the new drugs allow patients with metastatic melanoma to live two years, “Two years is nothing when you’re 30,” said Dr. Anna C. Pavlick, head of the melanoma program at New York University.

Still, doctors and patient groups welcomed the progress because until now treatment of melanoma that had spread beyond the skin to distant organs “was terrible even by routine cancer standards,” said Dr. Vernon K. Sondak, chairman of cutaneous oncology at the Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa.

Also, the number of melanoma cases has been rising steadily, unlike for many other types of cancer. Doctors say that is because of unprotected sun exposure years ago, the proliferation of tanning salons and perhaps more attention to detecting the disease.

There were about 68,000 new cases of melanoma and about 8,700 deaths last year in the United States, according to the American Cancer Society. The fastest increases in incidence have been among people older than 60 and among women 15 to 39 years old.

The two drugs take advantage of new insights into cancer but work in different ways.

Vemurafenib is a so-called targeted therapy. It counteracts the effect of a mutation in a gene called B-RAF that causes the tumors to grow and spread. (The drug’s name comes from V600E  mutation).

The drug, which is taken orally twice a day, would be used only for the roughly half of melanoma patients who have this mutation. The drug significantly shrinks tumors in about half of these patients – or about a quarter of all melanoma patients.

Vemurafenib was developed by Roche and Plexxikon, a biotechnology company in Berkeley, Calif., that was recently acquired by Daiichi Sankyo of Japan. The drug is expected to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration within a few months.

Ipilimumab, developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb, was approved in March and is sold under the name Yervoy.

A series of articles in The New York Times last year followed the development of the drug, then known as PLX4032, and recounted how some patients close to death seemed to make miraculous recoveries.

The effect, however, typically lasts only about seven months before the cancer starts to grow again, though there are some patients who are still benefiting from the drug more than two years after they started taking it.   