webmd



Healthy Recipe Doctor
with Elaine Magee, MPH, RD

New E.coli Strain In Europe

You might feel safer from the threat of food poisoning when you are eating produce instead of meat. Yet some of the biggest recent food poisoning outbreaks have been with raw vegetables.

E.coli is a word that inspires fear in those, who like me are paralyzed at the mere thought of experiencing food poisoning. A couple of years ago, an E.coli outbreak linked to raw spinach precipitated panic, and now what appears to be a new strain of E.coli has been carried through 12 countries, mainly Germany. Health officials are unsure of the origin of the outbreak that has made over 2,000 people ill and caused 18 deaths.

German authorities have issued a warning to consumers to stop eating raw cucumbers, tomatoes and salad. Cases in France, the UK, Sweden, Denmark and The Netherlands have also been reported but so far they victims are believed to be German nationals visiting these countries or persons who had visited <a href="bbc.txt"> Germany </a>

With this latest <a href="cnn.txt"> E. coli </a> scare, albeit across the globe, I thought it was a great time to review a couple of food safety tips as it relates to fresh produce:

    Produce can become contaminated with salmonella, shigella, or E. coli during growing, harvesting, processing, storing, or shipping. It’s particularly important that you wash your spinach, lettuce, tomatoes, sprouts, and melons before handling or cutting them.
     
    Wash all fruits and vegetables under running water before eating, cutting or cooking, unless they’re packaged and marked “prewashed.” Produce with a tough outer skin, like melons and cucumbers, can be scrubbed with a clean produce brush and warm soapy water before you cut into them — just in case there is bacteria on the peel.

     
    Wash Your Hands: Unwashed hands are the most common cross-contamination agent between raw meat, poultry, seafood, eggs, unwashed vegetables and ready-to-eat foods, according to a study on food handling behaviors published in the Journal of the American Dietetic Association.
     
    Wash your hands longer and more often than you think you should. Scrub hands together vigorously for at least 20 seconds with hot soapy water. It takes that long for the soap and scrubbing to remove some of the germs.

